Dave Roberts: Hi.
I'm Dave Roberts
from the GPU Software team
at Apple.
I'm really excited to share
some of the updates to the GPU
in the new
Apple A15 Bionic chip.
Later on, Katelyn Hinson,
my colleague
on the GPU Software team,
will tell you all about the new
Metal features of the GPU.
She'll also show you
how to use those features
in your Metal apps while
exploring some cool use cases.
The A15 Bionic is
a powerful new platform
for your Metal apps and games,
with updates to the CPU, GPU,
Neural Engine, and other
user experience-enhancing
technologies.
The A15 GPU builds upon the same
tile-based deferred renderer
and unified memory architecture
as the A14 Bionic.
While we've made many
microarchitectural improvements
in various areas,
there are some important changes
for performance
that I should highlight.
The A15's GPU has
up to five shader cores,
and that fifth core provides
a performance boost
of 25 percent at the same
GPU core frequency.
The shader cores now have double
the F32 floating-point
math units
which can boost GPU performance
on math-heavy workloads.
The A15's GPU also makes the UI
even more responsive
and extends battery life
even further.
And you get all of these
great improvements for free
without any modifications
to your code.
But that's not everything!
We brought some brand-new
features to the A15 GPU
that you can use to make
your Metal apps even better.
And all of these
new capabilities
belong to a new Metal feature
set known as AppleGPUFamily8.
For the rest of the talk,
Katelyn and I will focus
on these new features
and explain what they are,
why they are useful,
and cover the changes
to the new Metal API
and shading language
that support them.
First up, the A15's new
graphics processing features.
Lossy compression, which uses
your app's texture memory usage
with minimal impact
on image quality.
This new A15 feature
gives you the same
texture memory bandwidth savings
as lossless compression.
I'll show you how to use lossy
compression in your Metal apps
with some more details
in a moment.
Later on, Katelyn will show you
how the A15 GPU
extends existing support
for sparse textures
by including rendering
to both sparse depth
and stencil textures.
Katelyn will also cover
a new compute specific feature:
SIMD group shuffle and fill.
The A15 adds these
new instructions
to the GPU core instruction set.
She'll explain this feature
and show you how to improve
your app performance
by reducing
compute kernel execution time
for applicable use cases
such as image processing.
I'll start by taking a closer
look at lossy compression.
To better understand
lossy compression,
it's worth revisiting
lossless compression.
The A12 Bionic first introduced
lossless texture compression
in 2018, and the A14 Bionic
added further improvements
to the feature in 2020.
Lossless texture compression
saves memory bandwidth,
which in turn saves power,
so your apps can do even more
on a single battery charge.
Lossless compression
ensures that it always
preserves texture detail.
In fact, your apps might already
take advantage
of lossless compression
on the A12 Bionic and later.
Check out the tech talk,
"Discover Metal enhancements
for A14 Bionic"
and the "Optimizing
Texture Data" article
on developer.apple.com
for more details about
lossless compression.
Lossy takes texture compression
to the next level
on the A15 Bionic.
In addition
to the bandwidth savings
that lossless compression
gives you,
lossy compression uses
just half the memory footprint
of an uncompressed texture.
Lossy compression
preserves texture quality
wherever it's possible.
And best of all,
you can easily apply this
to your render targets
on the A15
to take full advantage
of those memory savings.
You can enable lossy compression
by simply setting
a texture descriptor's
new compression type property
to lossy.
So why use lossy compression?
Well, compression saves
significant texture
memory bandwidth,
whether you choose to use
lossless or lossy.
It's the compression unit
that saves the bandwidth
by compressing textured data
before it's written to memory.
When you use
lossless compression,
the GPU must perfectly
preserve texture detail.
So Metal cannot guarantee
any amount of compression
and must allocate enough memory
to cover the full uncompressed
texture size.
However, when you use
lossy compression,
textures use just half the
memory footprint of lossless.
If the A15 GPU cannot
losslessly compress a texture
to fit within that 50 percent
smaller memory footprint,
it'll reduce the fidelity
of regions of the texture
so that it does.
Lossy compression supports most
pixel formats and texture types,
and you can use it
on your render targets.
In many cases, you can
enable it on textures
without any further
modifications to your app.
I recommend your apps
enable lossy compression
wherever the quality tradeoff
is acceptable to you.
The easiest place to enable it
is your final render target
where you're least likely
to notice a loss in quality.
Consider using lossy compression
for intermediate render targets
and use that memory saving
for other things,
such as increasing
texture resolution.
And be sure to review
your postprocessing change
to find render target candidates
that may benefit
from lossy compression.
Here are some of the use cases
in detail.
Take a look
at the visual difference
if I enable a lossy compression
for just the final
render target.
This split image compares
lossless on the left
to lossy on the right,
and the differences
are pretty subtle.
He's an image that shows
the per-pixel differences
between lossless
and lossy compression.
The black pixels
represent no difference;
blue to green represent
small differences;
and red represent
the biggest changes.
The red and yellow pixels
in this image
illustrate a few
isolated regions
that have the largest difference
in the final render.
If I zoom into one of
the regions with the scooter,
I have a hard time
seeing any difference
between the left
and the right images.
Intermediate render targets
also work well
with lossy compression.
Here's a side-by-side view
of the puddle's reflection
that compares lossless
and lossy compression.
If I switch to the per-pixel
difference representation again,
the lossy compressed reflection
has only minimal differences
from the lossless version.
Plus you can increase
the resolution of the texture
to add more detail
with the memory you save
with lossy compression.
For example, here's
a high-resolution reflection
that shows more detail
than the lossless version,
all while using
the same amount of memory.
The right side of this demo
uses lossy compression
for every renderable texture
in the scene.
When it's in motion,
the scene looks very stable,
and it's very difficult
to detect the difference
if you compare it to the
lossless version on the left.
Metal makes it easy to use
lossy compression in your apps.
Here's how.
Start by initializing a texture
descriptor as usual,
then set the compression type
property to lossy.
Next, set the storage mode
to private.
Finally, create the texture.
And your app can now
take full advantage
of lossy compression
and the savings it offers.
Note that you can create
textures for lossy compression
for most configurations
with a few exceptions.
For example, you can
use lossy compression
for most common texture types,
including 2D, 3D,
array, and cube.
But the feature doesn't support
some of the less common types.
Similarly, lossy compression
supports
most common pixel formats,
but not the formats
with packed color channels.
Lossy compression supports
textures as render targets,
in blit operations,
and when you access them with
sample and read operations.
However, note that you cannot
populate a lossy texture
with shader write operations.
Lossy compression
only supports textures
in private storage.
You cannot use shared
or managed storage nodes.
And lastly, lossy textures work
with other common features
like MSAA, sRGB,
and mipmapping.
Check out the Metal feature set
tables on developer.apple.com
for more details about
lossy compression support.
So in summary, lossy compression
saves the same bandwidth
as lossless compression
while also saving
50 percent
of the texture memory.
You can save significant
amounts of memory
depending on the use case
and how much you choose
to use lossy compression
in your apps.
Lossy compression aims
to preserve texture detail
but only slightly reducing
the quality for regions
where the compressed
texture data doesn't fit.
And lastly,
lossy compression supports
common texture types,
common pixel formats,
and all GPU access modes
other than shader writes,
making it easy for you
to use lossy compression.
Thanks for listening, and now
I'll hand over to Katelyn.
Katelyn Hinson:
Thanks, Dave.
I'm excited to introduce the new
sparse textures extensions
in the A15 Bionic.
Sparse textures are
a great way to create
high-resolution textures
while managing
your memory budget in Metal.
A13 Bionic first introduced
sparse texture support,
allowing you to map and unmap
texture tiles
on the GPU timeline.
For more details on how to use
sparse textures in your apps,
refer to the talks
from fall 2019 and 2020.
A15 Bionic extends
sparse support
by including depth
and stencil attachments.
The guiding principle
of a sparse texture is,
"Don't allocate
what you won't use."
For example, this app
doesn't need to map the tiles
behind the UI elements.
With sparse depth
and stencil textures,
this app can always leave these
obscured tiles unmapped.
You can optimize shadow maps
with sparse depth attachments.
If you're not familiar
with shadow mapping,
check out Metal's
deferred lighting sample
which uses this technique.
A shadow pass renders
the shadow map
from the light's perspective,
and the lighting pass
reads it back.
The texels sampled
from the shadow map
are always within
the projected frustum.
This scenario is a perfect
candidate for a sparse texture.
A large portion
of the shadow texture
does not need to be mapped,
as the lighting pass
does not sample these tiles.
Here's a scene
that uses shadow mapping
and its rendered shadow map.
The app can recover
the memory in the tiles
outside the view frustum
since it doesn't need
to write or read back
from those tiles.
Cascaded shadow mapping
is a more advanced technique
for shadows that use
multiple individual shadow maps
to cover the scene
more efficiently.
It allocates higher resolution
shadow maps near the camera
and lower resolution maps
farther from the camera.
For example, this scene uses
three overlapping shadow maps.
Each shadow map has
the same texture resolution
and is mapped to increasingly
larger areas
the further it is
from the camera.
The green highlighted areas
in the shadow map
represent the texels
that the lighting pass samples.
The lighting pass nonuniformly
samples from these tiles --
represented as a heat map --
with blue tiles undersampled
and red oversampled.
You can use sparse tiled
shadow maps
to replace these textures
with a single surface
that has adjustable resolution
based on sampling rate.
With sparse tiled shadow maps --
or STSM --
you create a single
sparse depth surface.
Instead of using
a fixed-resolution texture,
the surface has mapped tiles
across the sparse mipmap chain.
This technique
only maps the tiles needed
to match the desired
sampling rate.
Here's an illustration
of the physical resolution
for each tile
in its relative mip level.
You can freely and efficiently
adjust the resolution of your
shadow map across a scene
by mapping tiles
across different mips.
Here are the main steps
of the STSM technique.
First, generate the density map
based on the sampling rate.
Then construct the surface
and map tiles
according to the density map.
And then render to and sample
from the adaptive surface.
To generate the density map,
the geometry pass populates
a density map buffer
for the other passes.
The first step is to get
the sampling rate
across the shadow map.
The expected sample density
is calculated by tracking
the shadow space derivatives
of rendered geometry.
The fragment shader uses atomics
to store the derivatives
in a 2D grid,
collecting the sampling rates
across the shadowUV space.
Once you have the density map,
use it to lay out the tiles
for your sparse depth texture
and generate
a table of contents buffer.
This table of contents buffer
will be used
by your lighting pass.
First, map the tiles
of the depth texture
by iteratively dividing
the surface
and scheduling the mapping
of each mip level,
starting with the bottom mip.
To figure out
which tiles to map,
start by checking the sampling
rate of the current mip
from the density map.
In this example,
the density map indicates
the current mip is inadequate,
but the next mip level
is a good fit.
In this case,
you promote the whole tile
by mapping the next mip
and unmap the current mip.
Here's another, more
complicated scenario.
The density map indicates
the current mip is satisfactory
for at least one quadrant.
For the next mip,
the sample rate
and the density map meets
the target for two quadrants,
while the remaining two
are under the target rate.
In this case, map the tile
in the current mip
and map half the tiles
in the next.
Next a compute shader
writes a 2D table
that translates between
UV and mip levels,
which is stored in our table
of contents or TOC buffer.
Before sampling a texel
from the STSM,
the TOC buffer is read
by the lighting pass
by indexing the table
to get the mip.
The mip is then used as
an explicit LOD parameter
when you sample
the shadow map.
The next step is to render
the sparse shadow map.
First, cull the shadows
by using the TOC buffer,
then encode
the indirect draw commands
to render
to the sparse depth texture.
Render the surface by filling
each mip map individually
with an indirect command buffer.
ICBs are the perfect fit
for this task
since compute passes can,
in parallel, cull and sort
each shadow geometry mesh
against the resident areas.
The compute shader encodes draw
commands into individual ICBs
by testing meshes against the
bounding volumes of the tiles.
For large objects that stretch
across the shadow map,
the shader tests the object
against the relevant tiles
of each mip;
and it encodes a draw command
to the mip's ICB
if at least one tile overlaps.
If a mip doesn't have
any tiles that overlap,
don't emit a draw command for
the object to that mip's ICB.
The optimized set of draw
commands for each object
is encoded by the shadow
cull compute pass
by running all
intersection tests
in parallel compute threads.
Since the red mesh was
closest to the camera,
it had the biggest impact
at 11 tiles on our shadow map.
Compare that to the orange mesh,
the furthest from the camera,
which had the smallest impact
at three tiles.
Once the indirect draw command
is complete,
the STSM is ready to be sampled
in the lighting pass.
This table compares STSM
to shadow mapping
and cascaded shadow mapping.
The STSM sample rate
and effective quality
is about the same
as the single shadow map
but uses far less memory.
In fact, it uses less than a
percent of the memory footprint
for the same resolution.
I hope this deep dive
gives you some ideas
on how to create efficient,
high-quality shadows
in your Metal apps
with sparse tiled shadow maps.
Lastly, I'm excited to
introduce the new additions
to Metal compute in A15:
SIMD shuffle and fill.
In modern image processing,
convolution kernels are applied
for filters like edge detection,
blur, and sharpen.
Here's a convolution
applied to an image
from our modern rendering demo.
Workloads like this one
are typically limited
by texture sampling or reading
from thread group memory,
leaving the GPU's
math units underutilized.
Apple silicon provides
a rich set of SIMD instructions
that can be used
in Metal compute shaders
to help optimize
these workloads.
As threads of a SIMD group
run concurrently in lockstep,
SIMD group functions exploit
this lockstep execution
to share data
between its threads.
For more information
about existing SIMD functions,
please see the talks for
A13 Bionic and A14 Bionic,
where they were introduced.
Now let's discuss the new
SIMD instructions available.
New to A15 Bionic
is the support for SIMD
and quad shuffle and fill.
These instructions are designed
to improve sliding-window
image operations,
like the edge detection
convolution previously shown.
These functions optimize
compute workloads
by sharing data across
neighboring threads
in a given SIMD group
without using memory.
First let's look at the behavior
for quad shuffle down,
first supported in A13.
The data buffer has contents
A, B, C, and D,
which is loaded
into the registers
of a quad's threads:
zero, one, two, and three.
When applying a shuffle down
on a shift of one,
the register data in thread
zero, one, and two
get the data from threads
one, two, and three.
The computed quad lane ID
doesn't wrap around,
so thread three in the result
has the unshifted value D.
Instead, if the quad shuffle and
fill down instruction is used,
a fill buffer is provided
to update thread three
in the result.
Now the fill data of thread zero
is shuffled to the output data
in thread three.
Similarly, for a quad shuffle
up and fill with shift of two,
we see A and B are shuffled
to threads two and three,
and the data
from the fill buffer
is shuffled into
the output's lower lanes.
On Apple silicon, SIMD groups
are composed of 32 threads.
And the same shuffle and fill
behavior can be applied
across our SIMD lane,
where the lower delta lanes
are filled with the upper lanes
of the fill data.
The new SIMD and quad
shuffle and fill instructions
also have an optional
modulo argument.
This allows for user-specified
vector widths.
For a module of eight,
the SIMD group is effectively
split into four vectors.
The data buffer values are
first shuffled up two indices,
and the fill data is shuffled
into each set of eight threads.
Let's use these new instructions
in an example
where the kernel used
for edge detection
of our modern rendering image
can be optimized
using SIMD shuffle and fill.
In order to generate
the final result,
a 5-by-5 convolution
kernel is applied
to the input image.
The output image is split
into a set of SIMD groups,
where each SIMD group
is a 4-by-8 chunk,
each thread writing
to a single output.
Let's focus on generating the
output for a single SIMD group.
For the 5-by-5 convolution,
each thread must read
5 by 5 pixels from the input.
For each 4-by-8 SIMD group,
an 8-by-12 region must be
sampled in the compute shader.
The naive implementation
of this convolution
would require 25 samples
for each output thread.
This results in great overlap
across our SIMD group.
This can be optimized by the
shuffle and fill instructions,
eliminating duplicate samples
within a SIMD group
and sharing data
through register shuffles.
Let's see why we would need
to read from these locations.
First A is loaded,
which is a 4-by-8 window
where each thread in the SIMD
group samples a single pixel;
then B for the top-right window,
C for the bottom left,
and finally D
for the bottom right.
The red outline rectangle
indicates the destination region
of our SIMD group
for the output image.
Through four samples per thread,
the 8-by-12 input region was
loaded across our SIMD group
without any overlapping samples.
Refocusing on the 5-by-5 region
for thread zero,
these samples can be represented
as a 5-by-5 neighborhood.
Quad shuffle and fill down
can be used
to access the first row
of neighbors,
first shuffling down A's data
and filling with B's data.
Then the 32 wide vectors
from the previous row
are shuffled down
for the next row.
As the data is shuffled
down a full row,
a fill vector is needed
to shuffle the samples
from C and D in the upper lanes
of the 32-wide vector.
Using the same approach,
SIMD and quad shuffle down
can be used to get the remaining
samples in the 5-by-5 region.
Once the full neighborhood
has been shuffled,
these samples are used
as the input
to the edge detection algorithm.
While the naive implementation
sampled the full neighborhood
for each thread,
with the new SIMD and quads
shuffle and fill instructions,
the number of samples
for each SIMD group
is reduced by 84 percent,
eliminating overlapping samples
across neighboring threads.
Using the new SIMD operations,
many common image processing
and machine learning algorithms
can apply the same approach
to optimize shared data
across SIMD groups.
And that's it
for SIMD shuffle and fill.
Let's recap what we've learned.
Lossy compression
is an easy-to-enable feature
that saves memory
footprint and bandwidth
while maintaining quality
for your textures.
Sparse depth
and stencil textures
help you create efficient,
high-quality shadow maps.
New compute instructions
SIMD shuffle and fill
reduce overlap and improve
sliding-window image operations
for machine learning and image
processing applications.
And finally, all Metal apps
get an additional boost
in performance, responsiveness,
and power savings
from the overall
architectural improvements
of the A15 Bionic GPU.
Thank you for watching.